# Design focus, broad is best

My perspective on tech has changed recently. A year ago I was a media-oriented person, I studied digital arts for about two years and took some clases from industrial design. I learned about drawing, modeling, sculpting and writing from my days in the arts; but also about bio-design, permaculture, architecture and furniture design. My lens of the world, and especially the digital, was shaped by my studies. I used to fixate on how digital products *were made*. What techniques would work best to create a good product.

The Utopian goal of what I called a "good product" was a product with low cognitive impact, carbon footprint, and little to no proprietary methods involved. An app would respect your cense of appreciation by being beautifully designed like an elegant Emeco chair, it would respect our planet by working alongside the natural cycles of nature like the night-day or carbon cycle, it would respect your digital freedom by the very manner of open source and free software, and it would respect your mind by not constantly buzzing and interrupting your day. But the elements I had laid out for good digital design, were just that: elements. If you throw good design, free software, bio-design and cognitive precautions into a blender you don't automatically get a good, humanity respecting app or program. We're missing a crucial part of the puzzle: Intent!

For a piece of software to be good, it ought to have good intentions behind it. Services like Facebook are beautiful, mostly run on green energy, have settings to reduce cognitive dizziness, use and embrace some open source projects. Yes, its true that Facebook is not fully open source, or that it's not fully cognitively neutral by default, not 100% green, not award winning design, but those elements are present non the less. If these golden elements are present, why is the outcome not golden as well? Because the elements are not fully present? Because they are not absolutely beautiful, open, green, and peace-of-mind inducing? Well, if we expect absolutes we will eventually hit a wall. Most likely absolutes don't exist by the textbook definition of the word. These elements don't add up to a "good" Facebook because the elements are not *in focus*. For the overall goal of Facebook these elements are not important, Mark has other intentions for his empire.

My personal focus, my intentions, had more to do with digital methods and techniques, rather than intended outcomes. To understand outcomes and intentions we need to look deeper. My way of looking deeper into intent has spun me out of control, it almost looks like my obsession with methods is in itself a very limited method. Taking my abstract hat off, I'm referring to doubting my career and profession. I have goals and dreams that have to do with digital arts and design, but is this kind of degree what I really want or just one important part of the puzzle, but not the entire picture by itself? Am I wasting my time? Am I happy with this, do I really want it this bad? What I have come to find comfort in, my new favorite area or doman has become human psychology and behavior as individuals and especially as groups. After a very difficult semester, field with doubts and insecurities, I changed mayors. Now as an aspiring clinical psychologist I still strive for the same goal of becoming a part of the new renascence.

In my eyes, the true digital transformation is to transform ourselves away from digital and back to humanity. I want to be part of that tide, but the waters come from all directions at once. We need real people from all fields working together. Engineers and designers have taken the lead for too much time now, but this is not a project to be solved, or a product to be designed, this is our boat and our collective selves should lead the way. When all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail, and the only hammer we have is technosolutionists ideas. Steve Jobs said as an insult to Windows computers that if you put a bunch of engineers in one room and then once the specs are done they pass it along to the design and UX team they will come up with a PC, a functional computer with terrible design and awful user experience, but if you put a bunch of designers and engineers in a room they would come up with a Mac. Imagine now a world not lead by *only* designers and engineers. What if teachers had a say, doctors, working everyday people, environmentalists, cooks, philosophers, policy makers and grandfathers. What product would we make and how much of a leap would it be from the Mac? For the next revolutionary product or device we need a new revolutionary framework. A framework of intersectionality and inclusion. We don't get a new revolutionized world or paradigm by only disrupting tech or design. To open the gates to the flood of the new renascence we need broad, big, and democratic changes that affect us all. To borrow from the open source vocabulary, we need to open up! To new methods, new ideas, and we need to open ourselves to new people and new people especially, for we are the key for change we've been looking for in blockchain and other technologies. The solution has always been next door.
