# Digital divide

The phrase *digital divide* seems to come up regularly, why so? What is so divisive about digital? It seems that it signifies a gap we must close, a bridge we must build. But what is the nature of technology? Is it possible to bridge this divide? Why hasn't the digital gap closed already? Isn't our technology so advanced to solve problems of meare demand? What are we dividing? People from tech? People from people? this notion of digital seems all incisive until being juxtaposed with the wold divide, it seems that there is something so strange inside these two words that they almost seem to be in conflict. Like they contradict each other.

The textbook definition of digital divide refers to access to technology, some people have windmills and cars, but others have drones and iPads. So by this definition of divide we are referring to economic inequality. Some may claim that this is not a fundamental economic problem, but a matter of opportunity. Some people just don't have the chance to innovate and get themselves pulled up. But here lies one of the problems with this notion of digital divide. In this framework people have unequal access to technology, therefore technology is an equalizer, a neutral force. But undeveloped communities re not undeveloped by their lack of iPads, but most of them are undeveloped by other communities with conflicting interests. If technology is made by people with different interests than people who lack them, then necessarily tech will always make undeveloped populations "not fit in", they don't "behave well", or "use them like there supposed to" because the technology was not made for them, for their needs. In this way technology is not a solution for division, but division in itself. Digital technology *is* the division that partly causes the digital divide.
