# Free from freedom

A popular reading of the GNU license, texts, and GNU culture revolves around freedom - or more precisely to be absolutely free. The phrase *not free as in free beer but free as in freedom* is commonly use to explain the goals of the software freedom the GNU project strives for. The saying argues that the kind of free they conjure has nothing to do with price or commodity, this is not a economic model but a fight for our rights as programmers and users. Usually this is enough to clarify the GNU position, but this sort of word play is leaving the economic and social reality out of the picture, this saying is not distinguishing between handout booze and an enlightenment style freedom, this phrase is assimilating those concepts, some free software enthusiasts are essentially drunk with this notion, as they can no longer understand the struggle between the powers at play. We are blinded by freedom and its noble sounding cause, we desire freedom in the style of lust, we have fallen in love with a body and forgotten the soul. We express our love for freedom by pure aesthetics, some people advocate for free software because it's "less bloated." But freedom is not a matter of unnecessary complexity, freedom is not even about licenses, expression or ability. The freedom we claim to deserve is mostly absent on the GNU moment, for the four freedoms of software are not liberating us from tyranny but suppressing the very freedom we fetishize.

The idea behind the open source movement, in the eyes of the tech critical, is not to share or liberate software and its source code. If a computer program is open source, then in theory it will improve over time thanks to countless voluntaries, in the minds of open source advocates this is how progress looks like, this is how civilization advances and evolves. The counter argument is about ownership, all those open source lovers whom contributed to the program indeed have made the program better, but in the big picture there are some people who benefit from unpaid labor: Software property owners. It is also true that volunteers also benefit from the program, since in most cases users want a new feature or encounter a bug and then decide to add the feature of fix the big by themselves, thus acting in a purely rational transaction. But then again, one party befits more than the other, the basement programmer might get a convenient way to organize files or compile documents, but the corporation or property rights owner gets a polished product without rigorous design, revision and development - a product with a proved audience and market. This is a recipe for economic injustice, a skilled unpaid worker creates value for a third party who has incentives to take the value created by the programmer and turn it into profit. This critique is somewhat in line the GNU perspective, Richard Stallman famously despises open source software because it strives for people to  just fix some bugs; while GNU, he argues, is about freedom. But the open source community would disagree, in their eyes open source *is* about freedom. Both movements use this very same vocabulary to refer to different outcomes, the open source moment finds free flow of information and accessibility as liberating, while the free software camp finds independence and inspection as liberating. If both offer freedom, why are they so opposed if freedom is precisely against opposition?

The problem here, the origin of this entanglement is freedom, not by itself, because this approach for freedom is highly poisoned and soaked in ideology. For the software proprietors of the world, for example Microsoft who has open sourced some of their software, the freedom in openness is no free as in freely available, but free as in free market. Freedom in regards to the open and libre issue is not free as in free beer, but free as in *laissez faire*. Libre software advocated laugh at the open source movement for allowing big corporations to get away with free labor while simultaneously allowing non-for profit organizations use free labor for non commercial means. They claim to oppose exploitation for monetary means, but not for social means; this is a phenomenon I call "*libre labor*" as a play on free labor. The GNU mentality allows for libre labor to be exploited in the same manner than open source does. While open source usually exploits workers for money, those who use libre software as grounds to other means exploit libre workers for more perverted reasons. Libre workers may offer their labor for altruistic reasons to whomever can take it or wants it, this is the fatal flaw of GNU: That it allows for gritters, terrorists, gangs and ideologues to use free software to take away the freedom from others. Freedom by itself is not a worthy goal.

Freedom in principle and computer software have a common foundation: agency and choice. Freedom means choosing you own way, autonomy is key. To be autonomous means to have control over ourselves, to place limits, but to have control over another person, that is slavery. If freedom and slavery are opposed, then freedom must not mean the lack of control over the self, but a strict, defined and democratically held control over ourselves, to find freedom we must not only tear down the walls that oppress us, but we must also build a new zeitgeist of self regulation. Paradoxically, to be free we must embrace our humanity and acknowledge our limits, even if our limits are set against or immediate interests, we might really want to expand, but expansion requires stepping on top of others and violation their freedoms. A free world and culture is one of respect, the limits of ones freedom ends where the freedoms of another person begin. The restrictions we put on ourselves, our self regulation is in the end true liberty.