# Snap to grid ideology

Now, to continue to critique, analyze and counter-point what I call *grid ideology*, we must first get to know ideologies, what they do, how they do it and how to spot them. My main assessment regarding this mode of thinking is that, for the everyday tech enthusiast and social media users, the ideology itself remains invisible. This is not exclusive to our snap to grid society in regards to technology, many decades - and sometimes even entire generations - of indoctrination and normalization are required for ideology to function. Let's use an innocent joke as grounds of explaining the general concept of ideology: *One fish asks another "How's the water?", the other one replies "Water? What's water?"* The fact that fish are surrounded by water in their everyday life makes it imperceivable, the first step for an ideology to last is for the true believers to forget that they are engaging in worship. An internet devoted atheist may laugh at the idea that someone can go to a temple every Sunday, sing special chants, recruit new members, engage in new-speak, and even say a prayer without thinking they are part of an ideologically charged group; still ironically enough he might engage in cyber-atheist ideology himself, visiting anti-theist online temples every weak, regurgitating the same anti-religious arguments with an almost musical performative manner, trying to deconvert his deist friends, using specialized online in-group vocabulary, and essentially practicing some other ideology. It is precisely who think they can't be persuaded or duped whom are sufficiently deep within ideology.

But the perspective of ideology can be navigated past or even temporally withed. Think of the cinema screen, in the middle of a movie screening the story takes our full focus or attention, at this point we are not looking *at* the screen par se, but rather we are looking *through* the screen. A non-engaging story or the breaking of the forth wall serves as a reminder that we're actually staring into a rectangular white cloth rather than the characters inside the projection. But ideology goes way deeper, we may gain awareness that the characters are fake, but we still remain firmly seated at the cinema room, watching a fake story and paying for it, going extensive hours to work for the privilege to have a projector beam ideology into your eyeballs on the weekend. It's like we're not aware of the water we're all swimming in.

The kind of work we do to pay for propaganda as entertainment at the movies is extremely important for the ideology that it reinforces. Going back to digital technology, the sort of work we do on these machines is crucial, since it will ultimately create a narrative, a tale for us to enact outside of cyberspace. The main characteristic of grid ideology it's its obsession with characteristics in themselves. Other world-views work like lenses to interpret the world unconsciously, but the viewpoint of digital tech is not like a lens to see the world, but a grid to catch it. The logic of computers make experiencing the world incompatible with digital technologies, instead of living in the moment we must do the second best thing our devices allow us to do, to *capture* the moment. Only people have the fluidity and ambiguity to experience subjectivity - Einstein might have calculated relativity, but numbers don't enact it, we do. But computers can only understand the world in absolutes, so when faced with this inevitable incompatibility with the real and the virtual, the early architects of the digital decided that we must make it so. Early technologists had to decide how experience through digital should work, in many (if not all) cases, they decided to create grids, a matrix of information from with to bend reality to our mortal wills and desires. We would tame this horse no matter what.

To fit in the realness of now inside a hard drive we had to give something up. We can't store all the infinite details of reality inside a program, so we choose to capture enough detail to fool our brains, here is when our digital ideology was born. When we take a picture with our smartphone, we capture the light that reaches our camera censor, digital cameras are essentially grids of light sensitive materials, this is why we have the pixel, because our original image, real life, gets filtered though a grid. Some details stay, others are lost. Whatever details were captured are then interpreted and filtered again. They go through complicated math to further divide and categorize the individual pixels luminosity, color values and so on. Finally the resulting values get filtered one again by a compression algorithm, trying to find patterns of color and shape to then categorize them into blobs of abstract shapes that added into each other create a compressed version of the final JPEG image. In essence abstracting the real into a string of ones and zeros that don't even represent same the ones and zeros that hit the sensor in the first place. Images become abstract numerical approximations and generalizations of the real thing. This is why a photo docent quite look like you intended it to look, because the photo is just pretending to resemble what you see with your eyes, and not actually what's out there.

This same pattern of capturing reality and twisting it into an unreal icy spectacle can be found throughout tech. This is what I refer as *grid ideology*, the desire to simplify, misrepresent, capture and put people and reality itself into a box that is only understandable to a computer. We design our software to embrace this limitation of tech, and we built in features to incentivize users and programmers to think and act as if the world can be entirely understood as a framework to fill in with data. When we wanted to connect the world with technology we created the word wide *web*; Our image enhancing software was designed to snap items to a grid, Singers are now expected to always hit the right note, resulting in auto-tune; Our day to day communication is mediated by smart keyboards that try to predict and correct our every word; Time itself is now comprised of micro-moments that tick on the digital clock one after the other and so on. The fatal flaw of our tech is that it has a bias for *division*. The presence of a person or object in a digital environment entirely relies in chopping it down to a number and categorizing it into digital existence.

The media that results from a compartmentalized grid is equally dry of what makes the real wold special. All those YouTube videos, Netflix shows and Tweets from your friends and family suffer from digital malaise. In the early days of computing this dissonance between the real and the virtual functioned like the human body rejecting an implant, but the human body eventually adapts to this foreign object. Now this is the new normal, we have successfully embraced the incompatibility between experience and simulation. We even named this process the "Digital Transformation" or "Digital Revolution" or in some cases "Industry 4.0". These movements are necessary because of the inherent friction between the real and the replica, these movements claim to be disruptive and inevitable; but if technology has been a part of everyday life for years (in some places even decades) then when will the revolution end? When can we jump in our self driving cars and enjoy permanent leisure due to the robots taking over the economy? The revolution is not close to being over, in many ways it has only begun. While we stay firm on this earth as humankind, the digital utopia will remain a promise of grid ideology. Many experts and talking heads see the difficulties in transforming the world into a digitally mediated one, they claim that we only need more of the same to make it through. I think they are not to blame, for their conclusions logically follow from the basic premises of grid ideology. *If the wold doesn't fit in 720p video, then we need more pixels, a bigger resolution*.

This phenomenon is also understood in the technical filed, rather than the ideological or philosophical one, as Moore's Law. 