# Numbers and characteristics

We are an obsessive bunch. The glee brought upon us by our new highly sophisticated toys has blinded us of it's secondary effects. Our surroundings seem so normal from first person perspective, the only lens we naturally possess, but the arrival of technology meant that maybe - just maybe - we could break away this narrative limitation. The interconnectedness we should experience through our computer screen was supposed to be so powerful we can no longer understand ourselves in the same way. This promise, however, was a positive one - or at least it was to the early pioneers of computers and networking. We were supposed to break free from the chains of the physical. We would become cybernetic-super-humans with abilities not even conceived of. But instead of opening our third digital eye, our use of technology made us into an *obsessive & metric power-mad* society. The new perspective brought forth by technology wasn't about going beyond linear narratives or widening our understating of the human condition, instead the new perspective we learned from our devices is one of numbers, digits, characteristics and rankings - after all that's what computer programs are made out of.

On late night social gatherings with my friends, once small talk grinds to a halt, a few of us gather around the table to talk about the big topics. On occasions like this I often joke that every person thinks their field of study has all the answers about the issue at hand: Only a better understanding of our neuroplasticity will solve our deep desires to compete, *says the neurologists*; No! replies the psychologist, you're not getting it, we're battling each other due to deep psychological biases and trying to avoid trauma! And then comes the technologist and says *If we could only get everybody to download the correct app!* - This is of course, an exaggeration, a joke of sorts. But usually the joke was on me, because after cynically pointing out the fact that everyone has their own perspective biased on their field I would tell them that the key to it all it's our interpretation of media and the technologies that encapsulates it. But I think that's the beauty of conversation, each person is it's own little universe field with sub-universes. Bringing all this information to the table can seem messy, it can even turn into a shouting match, but the fluidity and organic rhythm of conversation is uniquely human. Each person brings their own lens, and together we can make great moments happen. But the problem with technology relates to this kind of mode of thinking. In the real world, we are all colored by a growing number of factors & the complexity of each factor grows as culture evolves - our default mode of perspective is guided by *a* perspective, *a lens*. But the inherent and material makings of technology when mixed up don't create a lens from witch to see the world, but a grid to capture.

Computer software is made out of ones and zeros, thus any abstraction that follows will remain bounded to the limitation of binary and fixed point logic. Meaning no matter how complex our programming languages are, or how intuitive our input methods are (Like virtual reality as a more "realistic" mode of input than a computer keyboard), our software can never break free from asking some kind of closed, yes or no, question - even if the program is looking to solve or answer an open ended question, it will inevitably produce a yes or no answer. In this way, tech is misguiding us and the consequences of understanding the world and each other as binaries has created or contributed to many of todays issues, and many more to come. Economic and political pressures have guided us throughout history, our society had been held by money and power. But just like the old kings were replaced by their own creation of money and the charter corporations, today money and politics have created a new medium that will soon overthrow them: Digital technologies. My prediction of tech taking over society is not a merely rhetorical or cautionary tail, in many ways our technologies have already flipped a switch on our collective conscious. This mode shift is born out of the binary nature of tech, and it results in a new ideology. This new lens does not possess any new ideas, rather it focuses on methods, rather than the goal. A society under the influence of grid ideology can only understand the wold in terms of numbers, thus we have created (or are currently making) a society of characteristics. We are obsess with numbers, rows of information, grids and optimization - this is an acquired taste we learned from our devices, thus we no longer are influenced, controlled or binded by governments, corporations or money, but by our rectangles in our pockets.

Early technologists were not blindfolded by grid ideology, they could understand technology on different terms. They wanted our computers to be of companionship and self-reflection, but highly surrounded by early nerd-geek culture, so instead of *"building the Uber of software installers"* they build the computer wizard. They created electronic mail, an open text box to be filed with nuanced and complex answers. For computer pioneers, programming was a method for a specific goal, rather than being in love with the method to the point of forgetting their goal. Because tech culture was born from geek culture and hippie 60's counterculture, the inventions of their highly stoned minds had the goal of widening consciousness, but somewhere along the way the methods for achieving higher consensuses became more important than the goal itself: Programming became more important than the program. This obsession with the medium rather than the goal started to manifest itself in computer *aficionados*, or as they like to call themselves: computer enthusiasts. Their name perfectly spells out their focus, they are not excited about compu-*ting*, but compu-*ters*, they would build their own computer tower and tinker with their software and hardware not to get to a specific goal, but for the joy of tinkering in itself. This is not a bad thing by itself, this kind of hobby can be extremely enriching and can sometimes feel like maintaining and expanding a garden, just for the beauty of it all. The problem did not arise from enthusiasts themselves, rather than the canonization of computers and the internet as a medium. Think about, for example, early video entrainment; in the 80's we had videocassettes, each tape housed a movie or a show, so when you were looking for entrainment you would pop in the video into the VCR machine and watch *that specific show*. With the invention of the remote control movie lover around the world can now watch many things, sometimes at once (some people got around to see the last 30 minutes of the drama hospital show just before skimming through channels and catching the middle part of a movie re-run - essentially watching more than one show or program "at once"). Meaning that after the remote control you did not watch *a show*, you watched *the TV*. This is an example of how the medium becomes the main message, the focus always tends to change from the content to the packaging. Computer enthusiast's mistake was to fall in the same medium-message trap, they are not using `Microstf Word.exe` on their graphical operating system inside a metal box to write in, they are using the computer; they're not joining a network of devices using the same protocols to exchange information, *they're on the internet*. Essentially, the abstraction and popularization of the medium of computing made it so ubiquitous as to create a world-view based around digital means, rather than achieving technological real world goals.

Thus we created technologies without goals; what's the point of social media? To connect the world, but to what end? What does Mark Zuckerberg actually wants Facebook to achieve? Social unity, political mobilization, money? In a strange way the answer is all of the above, this is because the point of social media is to socialize digital media in itself. The point of Facebook is *to continue to Facebook*, that's the reason Zuckerberg is so afraid of anti-trust law and competition, because outside obsolete forces (law and government) are getting in his way. Mark's mind, poisoned by grid ideology, can only think of methods instead of goals for his company - Facebook buys competitors and then decides what to do with them after the fact, but most frequently he just adds his newly purchased technology to Facebook, so his digital media platform can continue to platform the idea of digital platforms as a valid and worthwhile medium. For Facebook and other social media sites, the whole point is to remain themselves forever: In other words, their goal is not to achieve a goal, because projects ends when reaching their goal, their goal is to remain as the medium and the message, just like television shows transformed themselves into TV as a whole, digital platforms are, and want to, transform themselves into computing or the internet as a whole. Social media sites have, partly, won this battle already.

