# Hello World

Understanding digital technology is a task that can be achieved from many different places. We can study legal matters of the net, the historical background that lead to computers, we can apply a sociological approach to study users behavior, we can even talk in technicalities of code and programming. For now I will ignore the multifaceted nature of tech. My analysis will therefore begin with something we can all identify and relate to: The smartphone. These devices shows us in our everyday life the first characteristic of digital: That digital devices are more than they appear to be in the surface. We understand this out of mere observation in many different ways, one of them being about the usefulness of the device. Your first experience with a smartphone probably thought you that the device you're holding has multiple uses. It can help you talk with friends, make shopping lists, watch movies, read book, answer questions using the web, take pictures, play games. But a new smartphone owner may soon realize that those icons that allow the functionalities listed above are only the pre-installed apps and that an entire universe of new apps can be discovered via the application store. There is an appearance of ever expanding possibility with digital technology, with your phone this might manifest in the nearly endless forms, apps and functions the device can perform. It can be a calculator, a flashlight, a music player, a document writer, and the list appears to tend towards infinity.

The first lesson we should learn from digital is that the initial appearance is almost always broaden, there is always something more going in in a deeper level. And so our initial shook and excitement for the shiny and brand new device wares off with the passing of time, and something really particular happens now. We get used to it, how strange is that? We have learned that this smartphone can morph and bend to cover entire domains of our necessities but then we stop doing new things with it. We end up doing more of the same kind of actions on our phones: install apps, configure a new kind of program, open this, upgrade that. We may use different programs, but they still work within the same framework. It's always within the same vocabulary, we still have apps, profiles, logins, tapping, zooming, and so on. But the ever shifting powers of tech have for a mysterious reason failed us, the smartphone has find it's final form.

If you were to close your eyes and imagine a smartphone you'd probably think of an iPhone. Like many trends in the tech industry, apple has created the popular design for the smartphone, we expect more or less a device similar to the iPhone when we picture a generic smartphone. But this iconic image of the iPhone was not always set in stone. As of writing this the most recent change to the iPhone series happened in 2015, the touch screen of the device was revisited. The S6 model introduced "3D Touch", it allows for the user to press on the screen lightly and with extra force. Meaning you can lightly tap on an icon and use it, or you can apply extra force, or as apple called it you can 3D touch it, to find extra options. For example normally to take a phone with the front facing camera - also known as "taking a selfie" - you would have to open the camera app by tapping on the camera icon, then swiped from the menu to select the front facing camera, then tap the shutter button to actually take the picture. The medium of touchscreens creates this sort of complexity, because you have several options on how to take a picture, and your finger is the main pointing or action device, then it would necessarily become cumbersome to achieve a hyper specific task outside of the most basic functionalities of the phone. To turn the phone one, simply press the power button, to text a friend, well it gets complicated quickly. Therefore the expansion of touch functionality would become a good thing, you'd maybe expect it to be so. With 3D touch to take a selfie just 3D touch the camera icon and a shortcut to take a selfie would appear, getting rid of redundant screen interaction and getting straight to the action the user wants to perform. 3D touch would, ideally, serve as right clicking on a computer, revealing more specific functions like copy and paste. For a brief moment it looked like apple did it again, they successfully re-invented the smartphone by introducing a new way to interact with your phone, imagine all the possibilities! The most enthusiast among us, including myself, expected the industry to be disrupted and revolutionized, we would get a new kind of toy to play with. But just four years later the feature would be completely abandoned (Holmes, 2019). The fact that the main way we interact with our phones is subject to change, that change *is possible* and the required innovations and new ideas are within reach comes into direct contradiction with the state of how things are. Digital can change, attempts at changing it had been made, but it remains fundamentally the same as before. The iPhone once reinvented how we thought of the telephone, but newer attempts at reinventing or re-imagining the smartphone have failed. Some device manufacturers like Samsung think a stylus can revolutionize the smartphone industry, LG once tried to spice up smartphone interface design with their 2015 model, the *LG V20*, that included a thin horizontal screen strip on top of the regular screen, this thin screen allows for quick access to settings usually hidden under a pull down menu, it also serves the function of showing notifications, it is essentially a dedicated screen for notifications, and other elements usually present on the notifications bar like the time, battery status and signal strength. This new screen also unlocked new potential in the shortcut department, it can how incoming calls, allow the user to quickly access frequently used apps, and it does all of this without interfering with whats happening on your screen, since all of this is going on on a second screen. You could be watching a movie and receive a text, but instead of a notification panel covering a portion of the movie as for quickly glancing at the notification's content, you can receive the notification on the second screen only without it covering up the move you're watching. A second screen for notifications and shortcuts, a stylus for more direct notation, a pressure sensitive screen (in form of apple's 3D touch) are all examples of one of digital's main characteristics peeking its head. Digital can shift, shape and morph into something new, it usually does in the form of new apps unlocking new features and functionalities: New ways to use the camera, like augmented reality experiences; more specialized needs being covered with pre-existing features, like a maps app for bikers. But some parts of digital don't seem to change, here lays a paradox, technology is both a force for change and conformity, it disrupts entire industries like the taxi industry with apps like Uber and Lyft, but it can't seem to disrupt itself or its own internal logic or mechanisms.

By learning that there is more that meets the eye within digital technology, to put it in a very cliché 90's cartoon-y way, we became accustomed to constant change, yesterday my iPhone was a device for calling my friends but today it became a device to play Pokemon and get a discount at Starbucks. With digital there is a kind of subversion of expectations, like in a magic show we feel suspense before the trick is revealed, *is the magician going to disappear the volunteer? cut him in half or turn him into a dove?* We essentially don't know, and that's precisely the fun of digital. With your own personal experience you might be able to remember the joy of experiencing or using your first computer, smartphone or tablet. Digital does seem at a point like a magic trick, a famous saying in technology and science fiction circles captures this notion: "Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic" (Clarke, 2000). The oculist nature of technology and the magical feeling go hand in hand, digital appears as one thing on the surface but then it subverts expectations by becoming something else just like in an act of magic. The magician must necessarily hide his trickery in plain sight for the illusion to be successful and for joy to arise from the audience. How does the rabbit appears out of the hat? As part of the audience we don't know, and how does your cellphone turns into Instagram? As users we don't know. The magic, the real stuff, is always hidden not by complex mechanisms or magical spells, but by the roles we play in this dynamic. The different roles, for the sake of example, in magic do evoke completely different outcomes and interpretation of what magic is. To an audience member, a kid watching from TV, magic is all about mystery and wonder; to the performer on set magic is an act, a series of instructions to follow to create said wonder and joy. Will the kid decide to get a few magic magazines or ask his friend about his card tricks then the subject of magic becomes the producer of magic. Change of perspective turns the audience to the creator. This swapping of roles should be nothing new to most of us, even before the Internet those people interested in film making watched behind the scenes bonus content and talk show interviews with the crew, as much as popular science enthusiasts bought magazines and organized book clubs. There is always a chance at a glace behind the curtain. Sometimes this glance at the creators role happens *en masse*, like it did in the famous TV special *Breaking the Magician's Code: Magic's Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed*, on it a masked magician performed stunts and tricks and then explained them to the audience (Don Weiner, 1997). Our first lesson from digital is that it has underlying mechanisms that don't reveal themselves on their own in a magician-like fashion. To break the magician's code with tech to begin to understands what mechanisms make it function we need a similar role reversal. The secret sauce of tech will not reveal itself by merely using digital devices like your phone or computer, because when you operate those devices you are interacting with them on one level, while on some other level the logic of the device shelters.

To the technically savvy what happens underneath is not alike magic, but a boring set of instructions. For computers and digital devices are ruled by code, professionals write a set of instructions for the computer to perform like add two and two, or add all the numbers in the columns from an Exel spreadsheet. You might have tried to learn to code, or had some basic programming classes in school; but a deep understanding of technology is not gained by living in one area exclusively. When you code, your role as a programmer is very different than the role when using a program. You might learn all there is to know about one specific programming language, or all the details about a platform or environment, but that expertise will not teach you the most important things about how its used, or what are the consequences or using it. Just like by being an iPhone know-it all; by knowing all the shortcuts, hidden settings, what apps work best for the most common tasks; by becoming an expert about how to use your phone you wont necessarily learn much about how your phone works on a programming basis. Great knowledge about how to *use* a digital product does tell you something about how its *programmed*, you might learn some basic logic of a program (like finding out that there is a limit on how many contacts you can mark as favorite in your email app) but that inside will not, and can not be as profound or complex as the code itself. The realm of code and use are related but separate. Just like eating food might give you a hint on the ingredients, but will not tell you the exact recipe, or what kind of equipment was used to cook it or where did the ingredients come from. The reverse is also true, you might be an expert in food production, know exactly where the vegetables come from, how they are conserved and spiced, but that will till you almost nothing about the experience of eating one particular dish, yes you will have an accurate idea of the taste, but beyond that it remains mysterious; what emotions does it invoke on the consumer? Does he or she come often to this restaurant? why do they attend so little or so much? 



















---

Holmes, A. (2019, September). Apple’s new iPhone 11 and iPhone 11 Pro quietly ditched a feature that was first introduced 4 years ago [Online news outlet]. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/apple-discontinues-3d-touch-iphone-11-replaces-with-haptic-touch-2019-9

Clarke, A. C. (2000). Profiles of the future: An inquiry into the limits of the possible (Millennium ed). Indigo.

Don Weiner. (1997, 1998). Breaking the Magician’s Code: Magic’s Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed. Nash Entertainment.

