# Digital Rights

With the turn of the millennium a new world of possibilities opened up thanks to digital technology. Little did we know, but the days of the analog were counted, soon enough a new space for creativity and flourishment would cast itself into all areas of our lives. This unlocked creativity came in many forms, but little to no concern - or not enough concern - was taken to the level of creativity we discovered in ourselves. These tools eliminated so much of the friction of our mind that, even in the early days of tech, we begun creatively destroying some of the grounds of our culture. Today's entrepreneurs live by a kind of disruption motto, this is not a coincidence. For the blessings of digital are so overpowering, as to show it's bias. Similar to people, who have "traps of the mind" or illusions in the form of cognitive bias; we tend to perceive patterns where there are none, etc; digital technology has its own biases, that on their own are not worth loosing sleep to, but when our society is shaped, modeled, educated, and expressed by digital means - then the bias of *ones and zeros* ripples into every aspect of culture.

Digital spaces have an interesting effects on who inhabit them, we can create and manage multiple identities, get lost in the crowd, we entertain ideas for the sake of it, we jaywalk between domains and websites as if it was nothing. We are so accustomed to our cybernetic homes that we created new rules, different rules, about how to interact with people and with software. For example, in online spaces we understand the law to be meaningless when it comes to copyright. The legal framework for dealing with intellectual property makes sense with a brick and mortar business, a physical work of art, or a plastic product. But the biases of digital technology are so unorthodox to material logic that this notion of intellectual property and copyright just does not make any sense online. The raw materials of an intellectual work online are *copy-paste-able*, so we copy away; and we build a different kind of culture around this disregard of the law.

We have changed, and we have lots to thank to our digital selves. But we must remain aware that the ripple of digital disruption is not a thing of the past. The waves of the ocean are roaring with change, and to move forward into the digital age we must embrace the fact that the old paradigm is fading. Now a novel idea enters the room, an idea I will argue is ultimately naive. *The new age is here, so we might as well dive into the sea*, an inclination towards digital-absolutism creeps behind the corner and begin staring us all in the eye. To embrace change should not mean to flip the whole playing board and throw the dice and instructions on the floor. We should not forget why we like digital technology in the first pace, only by understanding what do we want our of tech we can amplify its strengths and filter its weaknesses; what we defiantly don't want is a romantic-obsessive love for digital for the sake of digital. In this book I try to get to know it better, find out what it likes and if we could make a good team or panther.

Look, I admit it, digital might not be perfect, but pretending it is will cost us a tremendous amount of wasted effort. I might not come off as your regular technology lecturer or thinker, through this book you will come to understand my great cynicism for tech. Today's fixation on digital is, in my view, ultimately harmful. However, I am not a pessimist. I have great hopes for technology and a sane digital future, but to understand the true potential of this tool, we must also understand were and how it can go wrong.

Something must be perfectly clear from now on: This topic can become unconformable. Not unconformable in the visceral or gross kind of scene, but if you have been taking in technology just as it is, then thinking and exploring the characteristics of tech might cause unease. Analyzing tech, you'll come to find out, is a whole lot like analyzing one-self. Digital appears to be about silicon and C++, but its not as removed from reality as you might initially suppose. It has to do with materials, therefore the politics and economics of mining the silicon necessary for the chips on your smartphone suddenly present themselves. Digital also comes to the root of very people-centric issues like connection, friends, our fears and desires, creativity and empathy, what makes us human and so on. Philosophizing about the ramifications and insides of digital technology will inevitably ask the question of *where do you stand?*

This is the part when turbulence begins. Because the great irony of digital is that it can both incite creativity, disruption, constant change in the form of updates and patches, and at the same time it triggers complicity and uncritical thinking. Funny how our tools capable of being re-programmable were all programmed to produce the same outcome! For example, think of social media. The basic premise of social media is to somehow connect people and provide them with a space to socialize. We must realize that there are an endless ways a computer program or a webpage might tackle this: It can be about sending written letters and digitizing them with a scanner, why not? It can be a like phone call where people join in different groups; It can be a drawing based app, or an app where only other users can write your bio, etc. etc. It can be any color you want, it can be organized in one million different ways; but social media sites and apps are not pulling ideas from the ocean of design possibilities, instead social media platforms, and the web in general, has turned into five giant web sites filled with screenshots from the other four. *(The Internet’s Mid-Life Crisis, 2019)*.

Social media sites have a special place in our hearts and minds. But especially our minds, they occupy a tremendous amount of cognitive space and their design have something to reveal about themselves, and how we ought to interact with one another. The idea behind *Digital Rights* is to draft a set of guidelines or rules to create a digital space better suited for all. But coming up with rules for the sake of it is not a winning strategy, instead I will take digital technology as an object of study. Only by understanding computers, smartphones, real world censors, and the like we can begin to theorize or create a fair regulation of sorts. Any other "blind" attempts at drafting regulation is not only unfounded, but incomplete, and risks creating a different kind of hostile environment we supposedly tried to regulate away. To unpack the digital is not an easy task, my goal is to make this an accessible read, so I will go out of my way to describe various aspects of technology as if we were complete outsiders to the sometimes strange parts if the Internet and its uses. I will assume a basic understanding of computers from the reader. The many lawmakers and authorities capable of implementing the changes proposed by *Digital Rights* are mostly from a generation with the grasp of technical knowledge I will lecture to with this book.

All of society is now walking on thin and fragile lines of code. Some people cannot bare the pressures of digital and end up falling into the abyss. He should instead turn digital technologies into a nest to catch all people in need. We have basic needs as members of humankind, but the characteristics of people and the characteristics of technology have some overlap, it is in this shared space that we can find the necessities to cover with Digital Rights.


---

The Internet’s Mid-Life Crisis. (2019, December 10). In The Agenda with Steve Paikin. https://www.tvo.org/video/the-internets-mid-life-crisis


