Digital Rights
==============

With the turn of the millennium a new world of possibilities opened up
thanks to digital technology. Little did we know, but the days of the
analog were counted, soon enough a new space for creativity and
flourishment would cast itself into all areas of our lives. This
unlocked creativity came in many forms, but little to no concern - or
not enough concern - was taken to the level of creativity we discovered
in ourselves. These tools eliminated so much of the friction of our mind
that, even in the early days of tech, we begun creatively destroying
some of the grounds of our culture. Today's entrepreneurs live by a kind
of disruption motto, this is not a coincidence. For the blessings of
digital are so overpowering, as to show it's bias. Similar to people,
who have "traps of the mind" or illusions in the form of cognitive bias;
we tend to perceive patterns where there are none, etc; digital
technology has its own biases, that on their own are not worth loosing
sleep to, but when our society is shaped, modeled, educated, and
expressed by digital means - then the bias of *ones and zeros* ripples
into every aspect of culture.

Digital spaces have an interesting effects on who inhabit them, we can
create and manage multiple identities, get lost in the crowd, we
entertain ideas for the sake of it, we jaywalk between domains and
websites as if it was nothing. We are so accustomed to our cybernetic
homes that we created new rules, different rules, about how to interact
with people and with software. For example, in online spaces we
understand the law to be meaningless when it comes to copyright. The
legal framework for dealing with intellectual property makes sense with
a brick and mortar business, a physical work of art, or a plastic
product. But the biases of digital technology are so unorthodox to
material logic that this notion of intellectual property and copyright
just does not make any sense online. The raw materials of an
intellectual work online are *copy-paste-able*, so we copy away; and we
build a different kind of culture around this disregard of the law.

We have changed, and we have lots to thank to our digital selves. But we
must remain aware that the ripple of digital disruption is not a thing
of the past. The waves of the ocean are roaring with change, and to move
forward into the digital age we must embrace the fact that the old
paradigm is fading. Now a novel idea enters the room, an idea I will
argue is ultimately naive. *The new age is here, so we might as well
dive into the sea*, an inclination towards digital-absolutism creeps
behind the corner and begin staring us all in the eye. To embrace change
should not mean to flip the whole playing board and throw the dice and
instructions on the floor. We should not forget why we like digital
technology in the first pace, only by understanding what do we want our
of tech we can amplify its strengths and filter its weaknesses; what we
defiantly don't want is a romantic-obsessive love for digital for the
sake of digital. In this book I try to get to know it better, find out
what it likes and if we could make a good team or panther.

Look, I admit it, digital might not be perfect, but pretending it is
will cost us a tremendous amount of wasted effort. I might not come off
as your regular technology lecturer or thinker, through this book you
will come to understand my great cynicism for tech. Today's fixation on
digital is, in my view, ultimately harmful. However, I am not a
pessimist. I have great hopes for technology and a sane digital future,
but to understand the true potential of this tool, we must also
understand were and how it can go wrong.

Something must be perfectly clear from now on: This topic can become
unconformable. Not unconformable in the visceral or gross kind of scene,
but if you have been taking in technology just as it is, then thinking
and exploring the characteristics of tech might cause unease. Analyzing
tech, you'll come to find out, is a whole lot like analyzing one-self.
Digital appears to be about silicon and C++, but its not as removed from
reality as you might initially suppose. It has to do with materials,
therefore the politics and economics of mining the silicon necessary for
the chips on your smartphone suddenly present themselves. Digital also
comes to the root of very people-centric issues like connection,
friends, our fears and desires, creativity and empathy, what makes us
human and so on. Philosophizing about the ramifications and insides of
digital technology will inevitably ask the question of *where do you
stand?*

This is the part when turbulence begins. Because the great irony of
digital is that it can both incite creativity, disruption, constant
change in the form of updates and patches, and at the same time it
triggers complicity and uncritical thinking. Funny how our tools capable
of being re-programmable were all programmed to produce the same
outcome! For example, think of social media. The basic premise of social
media is to somehow connect people and provide them with a space to
socialize. We must realize that there are an endless ways a computer
program or a webpage might tackle this: It can be about sending written
letters and digitizing them with a scanner, why not? It can be a like
phone call where people join in different groups; It can be a drawing
based app, or an app where only other users can write your bio, etc.
etc. It can be any color you want, it can be organized in one million
different ways; but social media sites and apps are not pulling ideas
from the ocean of design possibilities, instead social media platforms,
and the web in general, has turned into five giant web sites filled with
screenshots from the other four. *(The Internet's Mid-Life Crisis,
2019)*.

Social media sites have a special place in our hearts and minds. But
especially our minds, they occupy a tremendous amount of cognitive space
and their design have something to reveal about themselves, and how we
ought to interact with one another. The idea behind *Digital Rights* is
to draft a set of guidelines or rules to create a digital space better
suited for all. But coming up with rules for the sake of it is not a
winning strategy, instead I will take digital technology as an object of
study. Only by understanding computers, smartphones, real world censors,
and the like we can begin to theorize or create a fair regulation of
sorts. Any other "blind" attempts at drafting regulation is not only
unfounded, but incomplete, and risks creating a different kind of
hostile environment we supposedly tried to regulate away. To unpack the
digital is not an easy task, my goal is to make this an accessible read,
so I will go out of my way to describe various aspects of technology as
if we were complete outsiders to the sometimes strange parts if the
Internet and its uses. I will assume a basic understanding of computers
from the reader. The many lawmakers and authorities capable of
implementing the changes proposed by *Digital Rights* are mostly from a
generation with the grasp of technical knowledge I will lecture to with
this book.

All of society is now walking on thin and fragile lines of code. Some
people cannot bare the pressures of digital and end up falling into the
abyss. He should instead turn digital technologies into a nest to catch
all people in need. We have basic needs as members of humankind, but the
characteristics of people and the characteristics of technology have
some overlap, it is in this shared space that we can find the
necessities to cover with Digital Rights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Internet's Mid-Life Crisis. (2019, December 10). In The Agenda with
Steve Paikin. https://www.tvo.org/video/the-internets-mid-life-crisis

Hello World
===========

Understanding digital technology is a task that can be achieved from
many different places. We can study legal matters of the net, the
historical background that lead to computers, we can apply a
sociological approach to study users behavior, we can even talk in
technicalities of code and programming. For now I will ignore the
multifaceted nature of tech. My analysis will therefore begin with
something we can all identify and relate to: The smartphone. These
devices shows us in our everyday life the first characteristic of
digital: That digital devices are more than they appear to be in the
surface. We understand this out of mere observation in many different
ways, one of them being about the usefulness of the device. Your first
experience with a smartphone probably thought you that the device you're
holding has multiple uses. It can help you talk with friends, make
shopping lists, watch movies, read book, answer questions using the web,
take pictures, play games. But a new smartphone owner may soon realize
that those icons that allow the functionalities listed above are only
the pre-installed apps and that an entire universe of new apps can be
discovered via the application store. There is an appearance of ever
expanding possibility with digital technology, with your phone this
might manifest in the nearly endless forms, apps and functions the
device can perform. It can be a calculator, a flashlight, a music
player, a document writer, and the list appears to tend towards
infinity.

The first lesson we should learn from digital is that the initial
appearance is almost always broaden, there is always something more
going in in a deeper level. And so our initial shook and excitement for
the shiny and brand new device wares off with the passing of time, and
something really particular happens now. We get used to it, how strange
is that? We have learned that this smartphone can morph and bend to
cover entire domains of our necessities but then we stop doing new
things with it. We end up doing more of the same kind of actions on our
phones: install apps, configure a new kind of program, open this,
upgrade that. We may use different programs, but they still work within
the same framework. It's always within the same vocabulary, we still
have apps, profiles, logins, tapping, zooming, and so on. But the ever
shifting powers of tech have for a mysterious reason failed us, the
smartphone has find it's final form.

If you were to close your eyes and imagine a smartphone you'd probably
think of an iPhone. Like many trends in the tech industry, apple has
created the popular design for the smartphone, we expect more or less a
device similar to the iPhone when we picture a generic smartphone. But
this iconic image of the iPhone was not always set in stone. As of
writing this the most recent change to the iPhone series happened in
2015, the touch screen of the device was revisited. The S6 model
introduced "3D Touch", it allows for the user to press on the screen
lightly and with extra force. Meaning you can lightly tap on an icon and
use it, or you can apply extra force, or as apple called it you can 3D
touch it, to find extra options. For example normally to take a phone
with the front facing camera - also known as "taking a selfie" - you
would have to open the camera app by tapping on the camera icon, then
swiped from the menu to select the front facing camera, then tap the
shutter button to actually take the picture. The medium of touchscreens
creates this sort of complexity, because you have several options on how
to take a picture, and your finger is the main pointing or action
device, then it would necessarily become cumbersome to achieve a hyper
specific task outside of the most basic functionalities of the phone. To
turn the phone one, simply press the power button, to text a friend,
well it gets complicated quickly. Therefore the expansion of touch
functionality would become a good thing, you'd maybe expect it to be so.
With 3D touch to take a selfie just 3D touch the camera icon and a
shortcut to take a selfie would appear, getting rid of redundant screen
interaction and getting straight to the action the user wants to
perform. 3D touch would, ideally, serve as right clicking on a computer,
revealing more specific functions like copy and paste. For a brief
moment it looked like apple did it again, they successfully re-invented
the smartphone by introducing a new way to interact with your phone,
imagine all the possibilities! The most enthusiast among us, including
myself, expected the industry to be disrupted and revolutionized, we
would get a new kind of toy to play with. But just four years later the
feature would be completely abandoned (Holmes, 2019). The fact that the
main way we interact with our phones is subject to change, that change
*is possible* and the required innovations and new ideas are within
reach comes into direct contradiction with the state of how things are.
Digital can change, attempts at changing it had been made, but it
remains fundamentally the same as before. The iPhone once reinvented how
we thought of the telephone, but newer attempts at reinventing or
re-imagining the smartphone have failed. Some device manufacturers like
Samsung think a stylus can revolutionize the smartphone industry, LG
once tried to spice up smartphone interface design with their 2015
model, the *LG V20*, that included a thin horizontal screen strip on top
of the regular screen, this thin screen allows for quick access to
settings usually hidden under a pull down menu, it also serves the
function of showing notifications, it is essentially a dedicated screen
for notifications, and other elements usually present on the
notifications bar like the time, battery status and signal strength.
This new screen also unlocked new potential in the shortcut department,
it can how incoming calls, allow the user to quickly access frequently
used apps, and it does all of this without interfering with whats
happening on your screen, since all of this is going on on a second
screen. You could be watching a movie and receive a text, but instead of
a notification panel covering a portion of the movie as for quickly
glancing at the notification's content, you can receive the notification
on the second screen only without it covering up the move you're
watching. A second screen for notifications and shortcuts, a stylus for
more direct notation, a pressure sensitive screen (in form of apple's 3D
touch) are all examples of one of digital's main characteristics peeking
its head. Digital can shift, shape and morph into something new, it
usually does in the form of new apps unlocking new features and
functionalities: New ways to use the camera, like augmented reality
experiences; more specialized needs being covered with pre-existing
features, like a maps app for bikers. But some parts of digital don't
seem to change, here lays a paradox, technology is both a force for
change and conformity, it disrupts entire industries like the taxi
industry with apps like Uber and Lyft, but it can't seem to disrupt
itself or its own internal logic or mechanisms.

By learning that there is more that meets the eye within digital
technology, to put it in a very cliché 90's cartoon-y way, we became
accustomed to constant change, yesterday my iPhone was a device for
calling my friends but today it became a device to play Pokemon and get
a discount at Starbucks. With digital there is a kind of subversion of
expectations, like in a magic show we feel suspense before the trick is
revealed, *is the magician going to disappear the volunteer? cut him in
half or turn him into a dove?* We essentially don't know, and that's
precisely the fun of digital. With your own personal experience you
might be able to remember the joy of experiencing or using your first
computer, smartphone or tablet. Digital does seem at a point like a
magic trick, a famous saying in technology and science fiction circles
captures this notion: "Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic" (Clarke, 2000). The oculist nature of
technology and the magical feeling go hand in hand, digital appears as
one thing on the surface but then it subverts expectations by becoming
something else just like in an act of magic. The magician must
necessarily hide his trickery in plain sight for the illusion to be
successful and for joy to arise from the audience. How does the rabbit
appears out of the hat? As part of the audience we don't know, and how
does your cellphone turns into Instagram? As users we don't know. The
magic, the real stuff, is always hidden not by complex mechanisms or
magical spells, but by the roles we play in this dynamic. The different
roles, for the sake of example, in magic do evoke completely different
outcomes and interpretation of what magic is. To an audience member, a
kid watching from TV, magic is all about mystery and wonder; to the
performer on set magic is an act, a series of instructions to follow to
create said wonder and joy. Will the kid decide to get a few magic
magazines or ask his friend about his card tricks then the subject of
magic becomes the producer of magic. Change of perspective turns the
audience to the creator. This swapping of roles should be nothing new to
most of us, even before the Internet those people interested in film
making watched behind the scenes bonus content and talk show interviews
with the crew, as much as popular science enthusiasts bought magazines
and organized book clubs. There is always a chance at a glace behind the
curtain. Sometimes this glance at the creators role happens *en masse*,
like it did in the famous TV special *Breaking the Magician's Code:
Magic's Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed*, on it a masked magician
performed stunts and tricks and then explained them to the audience (Don
Weiner, 1997). Our first lesson from digital is that it has underlying
mechanisms that don't reveal themselves on their own in a magician-like
fashion. To break the magician's code with tech to begin to understands
what mechanisms make it function we need a similar role reversal. The
secret sauce of tech will not reveal itself by merely using digital
devices like your phone or computer, because when you operate those
devices you are interacting with them on one level, while on some other
level the logic of the device shelters.

To the technically savvy what happens underneath is not alike magic, but
a boring set of instructions. For computers and digital devices are
ruled by code, professionals write a set of instructions for the
computer to perform like add two and two, or add all the numbers in the
columns from an Exel spreadsheet. You might have tried to learn to code,
or had some basic programming classes in school; but a deep
understanding of technology is not gained by living in one area
exclusively. When you code, your role as a programmer is very different
than the role when using a program. You might learn all there is to know
about one specific programming language, or all the details about a
platform or environment, but that expertise will not teach you the most
important things about how its used, or what are the consequences or
using it. Just like by being an iPhone know-it all; by knowing all the
shortcuts, hidden settings, what apps work best for the most common
tasks; by becoming an expert about how to use your phone you wont
necessarily learn much about how your phone works on a programming
basis. Great knowledge about how to *use* a digital product does tell
you something about how its *programmed*, you might learn some basic
logic of a program (like finding out that there is a limit on how many
contacts you can mark as favorite in your email app) but that inside
will not, and can not be as profound or complex as the code itself. The
realm of code and use are related but separate. Just like eating food
might give you a hint on the ingredients, but will not tell you the
exact recipe, or what kind of equipment was used to cook it or where did
the ingredients come from. The reverse is also true, you might be an
expert in food production, know exactly where the vegetables come from,
how they are conserved and spiced, but that will till you almost nothing
about the experience of eating one particular dish, yes you will have an
accurate idea of the taste, but beyond that it remains mysterious; what
emotions does it invoke on the consumer? Does he or she come often to
this restaurant? why do they attend so little or so much?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Holmes, A. (2019, September). Apple's new iPhone 11 and iPhone 11 Pro
quietly ditched a feature that was first introduced 4 years ago \[Online
news outlet\]. Business Insider.
https://www.businessinsider.com/apple-discontinues-3d-touch-iphone-11-replaces-with-haptic-touch-2019-9

Clarke, A. C. (2000). Profiles of the future: An inquiry into the limits
of the possible (Millennium ed). Indigo.

Don Weiner. (1997, 1998). Breaking the Magician's Code: Magic's Biggest
Secrets Finally Revealed. Nash Entertainment.
