# Non computerized artificially intelligent systems

One has to ask himself about general applied intelligence. To tackle the bull trough the horns we first have to, as always, ask like a spoiled child one question over and over: What is 'x', where 'x' stands for whatever we are talking about, and then to following up with another what type of inquiry. Socrates sure was an annoying kid to be around. Regardless of the demonstrated pretentious quality present in here we must start our analysis of artificial intelligence by dissecting intelligence first.

A more thorough critique of intelligence and IQ in a later chapter, but for now we can start by making a simple, but jokey, observation that I made in my early years. This might be non generalizeable example, but my observation stands nonetheless: Isn't it that kids labeled as smart when it comes to school sometimes the dumbest of the bunch sometimes? I always was baffled by the so called intelligent classmates because even though they position themselves in a favorable light, they set themselves off for success and the like, but when it came to leaving the uniform behind and enjoying a social event they were always, at least to me, the most boring and plane kids to talk to. Not necessarily socially awkward, but more of a siting duck. If this kid was so intelligent, why is he not talking with me about any topic in a thought provoking way? The infant version of me seriously expected a genius when talking to smart kids, my cartoon-ish idea was that if we were, let's say, bowling then the smart kid would go on a big rant about the history of ball games and the particularities of indoor sports, but I got nothing, not even a smart remark about the design of the bowling stage or even if the soda is good. Instead he just followed along and played with us. It is not a controversial stance to say that school smart people, or book smart people, are not smart in the genius sense of an active imagination and a hunger for deep understanding, but book smart folks are just good at a very particular set of habits. They are good students, not a spark of intellectual delight, good at something very specific. In this way I comically exaggerate in saying that book smart people act the dumbest, because instead of gracefully glimpsing at beauty in knowledge and nature they brute force they way through school: Open book, read book, get calculator, punch in formula, get results. Of course the abilities and habits that book smart people posses don't make them stupid, they are indeed smart at managing their time and synthesizing and holding information for tests. But like a very cliche Hollywood B-movie plot, they may struggle to pivot their talents into prom night. Leaving my somewhat provocative rhetoric of presenting book smart kids as *dumb and brute forcing they way through academic life* behind we can arrive at the conclusion that intelligence of habit is almost always specific. A generally brilliant individual may share some of the book smart tropes, but I argue that their intelligence is not a kind of book smart intelligence raised to the next level. Instead they posses a different frame work to solve problems and to thing about academic and trivial topics. A complete case of what makes geniuses brilliant will not be further articulated here, for the topic's reach is getting increasingly out of reach with every sentence. But for the time being I take it as a given that there are habits or behaviors that help towards the optimization of a goal; studying hard to get a good score on a test, train for an athletic performance; and there is also a more organic and less formulaic general intelligence that involves perspective and creativity of thought; Noticing similarities in seemingly unrelated phenomena, rephrasing a particularly hard topic in a easy to understand way, arriving at a solution by a creative use of inspiration from another field.

Colloquially we can categorize intelligence into book smart, street smart, emotionally smart and so on. But for purposes of landing our conversation into technology let's package all of them together under the term weak intelligence, and let's contrast it with strong intelligence. We can also think of this intelligence model as narrow versus general intelligence. A person, as I will argue, can not fit into the narrow category since they are capable of achieving multiple tasks. It may be true that Micheal Jordan might not be good at chess, but to focus on his ability to play chess is as ridiculous as fixating on Magnus Carlsen's lack of NBA trophies. Laypeople are not comparable to Jordan or Magnus insofar of their social recognition in their respective fields, but they can be compared to laypeople due to the non totality of their intelligence is not a barrier for general intelligence but almost a kind of requirement. Someone is not "incomplete" for not revolutionizing all aspects of life, or even by not having any meaningful impact on the world whatsoever. Even a tragically depressed vagabond can carry out more that one terribly specific action. It may sound trivial but you might find it surprisingly hard to come up with a single instance of a single-purpose life form on earth. All living things, due to their multicellular makeup - to put it in a biological deterministic way - necessarily have to tackle multiple tasks for coexistence and sustainability of life. Even dying or failing organisms still need more than one complex multidimensional approach to solve any kind of issue. A patient gets sick so the body regulates its temperature, sends antibodies, regulates habits like sleep and food consumption to optimize the goal of defeating illness. If you look close enough at any behavior of people or the internal workings of a living organism you will find more than one thing going on at any given time. Movement and flow are, in a way, life itself. Therefore by our nature of being we can not help ourselves to posses this type of general intelligence. We can achieve multiple goals from multiple angles just by merely keeping on breathing and by remaining firm on the ground. Jumping outside the lens of pop biology and looking at the bigger picture of social life we can also find this kind of strong intelligence: We have self determined goals, due to internal desires and needs, sometimes those needs are met by or generated by our relationship to other people, so we act not as if our will is the puppet-master of our life but as if a blend of multiple goals pulls the strings. Because of our multifaceted goals we have no choice but to act in, to rely on, multifaceted solutions. We need food so we hunt, transport, farm, buy sell, work for money and drive a car to the super market to achieve this seemingly simple goal. The solutions we take in the most of monotonous circumstances are so complex but so part of everyday life that we forget their complexity. If living organisms are to become generally intelligent or multifaceted complex - due to their physical, material, biological and psychological circumstances - then is narrow intelligence even a real thing? When it comes to beings no, but objects can not, or at least have not shown characteristics of, being generally smart. Instead we find effective solutions, technical marvels and clever techniques. To organize ones life is a sign of intelligence, but to combine a portable phone with a portable computer is clever. Narrow or weak intelligence is similar the kind of intelligence present in a smartphone, a process that meets a goal. *They made an app on your phone for sharing a car ride, oh that's so smart!* But remember, these solutions are "narrow smart" like a cool or ingenious way to do something. To clarify of this distinction, a Swiss army knife as an invention is clever, or narrow smart, but a person or being with complex goals and methods is generally smart, or strongly intelligent.

The implication here is that objects and processes can also share this notion of intelligence, a bike is a smart move because it optimizes energy consumption in transportation if we contrast it with walking, so although we don't colloquially say that bikes are intelligent, they do posses a kind of intelligence. This opens the door for computers having intelligence, and is the first logical step towards non organic general intelligence, since computers poses narrow intelligence they can (hopefully) develop general intelligence like humans. But the trap of narrow intelligence is its fixation on one thing and one thing only.

Science fiction presents and predicts a future of impending doom. We are to cope with all the contradictions and ramifications form our actions and science fiction makes this absurdly clear. But our sci-fi blinders negate a different kind of gloomy present for a romantically apocalyptic future. There is something deeply wrong over here and we don't even want to know, so we fantasize with a robotic uprising to deal with reality. End is not only near, but has already begun, and it is our own basic self defense mechanisms laid out by Freud that keep us away from the real danger.

To imagine a future dystopian society we can focus on a particular trend in technology and then extrapolate from it. In the science fiction anthology *Black Mirror* we are presented with one trope each episode, the tropes can be special gadgets or social apps that result in unforeseen consequences. In the first season of the show we explore social media, content consumption and computer memory. In all three episodes our main characters end up with their lives being ruined. In the first episode we are shown a world not to far apart forum ours, in this episode we follow a fictional British prime minster Micheal Callow, who's daughter Susana

https://web.archive.org/web/20080815040701/http://www.singinst.org/blog/2007/06/11/the-stamp-collecting-device/