# User and consumer rights miss the point

The digital landscape has many problems, we know it at least by instinct. Many responses have arisen from our deeply felt discomfort with technology, the majority of this solutions are nothing more than plain band-aids and will do nothing to solve the problem but appeal to their proponents. Our digital malaise is real, we don't feel good, we reject this sense of digital vertigo; but in our desperation for a cure we have also rejected medicine and opted for homeopathy. We distrust the system so much that doing chemotherapy seems like injecting more poison into our wound, instead of a cold hearted corporate medic we crave for someone who will listen to our problems and feed us sugar pills, as long as we feel properly treated. Joining the alternative medicine lifestyle feels good, it fills the emotional void left by the disease without alleviating our physical disorder. The relationship digital activists have with those whom offer solutions for the twenty first century (and beyond) is the same as the patient in need and a homeopathy specialist. The problem is real, some of the criticisms made by homeopathy pundits are valid, but the methodology is unproven and unsound. When internet gurus criticize technology and silicon valley for creating addictive platforms, that depress the youth, separates families from watching movies together and instead each member viewing their own episode isolated in their own room, platforms that threaten democracy and truth with personalized propaganda, platforms that spy on users and sell their behavior to advertisers; when gurus make this kind of criticisms they are right.

But then something subtle happens, the same type of thing that happens on 30 second ad breaks: *The hero's journey*. In media and storytelling theory there is a concept you probably already have heard of, the three act story, in it we have a *setup* or incident, then a *confrontation* and finally a *resolution* or climax. *The hero's journey*, on the other hand, focuses on the happenings of the protagonist rather than the entire big picture story - but still meats the general beats from the tree act structure: Our hero goes through *departure* from the normal everyday life, followed by *initiation* were our hero goes to a strange unexplored world and goes on a quest and faces his lowest point, on his darkest hour he is tempted to give up or dies, then he is reborn ether in flesh or in spirit he completes his *return* to the initial world after a great battle that restores the world as it was in the beginning of the hero's journey.     *Departure, initiation, return; setup, confrontation, resolution*. Great storytellers use the tree act structure to tell great stories and teach lessons as old as stories themselves, while the hero's journey - since it has more mythical and personal connotations - is used against us to manipulate and deceive us. Your typical commercial goes like this: A young relateable person has a normal life until he or she encounters a problem (setup), then we see the character struggle to find a solution (confrontation) and just when they are about to give up we see the money shot of the product the commercial is trying to sell us (resolution, and *cha-ching*.) The product is not really crucial to the commercial structure, you can replace toothpaste with a car and the ad would still make perfect sense, what's important here is what is being sold to us as the solution. Whenever we see a narrative play our in front of us, be it fiction or non-fiction, we must remain critical of the tricks of storytelling, since a good narrative can sell any bogus solution, no mater how inappropriate or false the claims are.

The parallel between consumer goods being sold and technology goes deeper in the sense that people who use technology are to fight for their consumer rights. This is the ultimate maneuver of digital tech gurus, that all of the problems being perpetuated by technology can be solved by the mechanisms of consumption. We must never forget this switcheroo is being made by people who are trying to sell you something more than the idea of the next digital revolution, they sell their books, wired magazine, a new social media app, bitcoin, VPN's, smart devices, private smart devices, smart private minimalist devices, and other solutions that will never get to the heart of the problem. Internet influencers do this three act structure based pitch all the time, they invoke a problem with genuine critique and then tell you that there is a way out, be it by abandoning social media altogether or using ProtonMail over Gmail and so on. The narrative con I am describing is as perverse and abhorrent precisely because it transforms social problems (in digital grounds) into a commodity you can purchase, an ideology you can pray to, or a lifestyle you can embrace by becoming a consumer. This is why today's struggle against online surveillance is being fought in terms of consumer rights. If you are the customer you deserve respect for your privacy, but digital platforms are not products we consume, instead we are the product they consume - we are the programmed - but if instead we are consumers, users, fanatics, tech enthusiasts, part of a community, etcetera; if we are simply users then the good fight are user or consumer rights. This is a catastrophe, for we are not users but people: Our humanity and agency goes way beyond what apps we decide to download or what products we consume on the broader market. If we "*win*" the war for user rights or software rights, then the software wins, with our belief (acquired by advertisement) that we are users worthy of freedom and access to online discourse we are creating our own digital chains, we are so inside the virtual world to the extend that we have the opportunity to transform our virtual chains into real life, never changing, built into law, chains. Trapped in *user-dom* we might enjoy consumer protection but only insofar as it does not disrupts silicon valley and its agenda.

It's time we stop listening to digital techno-solutionists, platform influencers; leave this homeopathy phase behind; and listen to the doctors, professionals, intellectuals, artists, humanists, yes even the liberal arts professors, philosophers and timeless thinkers and theorists whom have predicted, diagnosed, and begun treatment of cultural issues. Since the problems of technology are, surprisingly for the newcomers into the broader humanities, not new. We can study new social media platforms and its adoption with an economic market lens, with a psychological lens of the nature of human relationships in digital spaces, with a historical lens based on real world invasions and colonizations, with a media theory lens by analyzing themes and popular plot pint being portrayed by the web-page's design. The end of privacy is only new insofar as the medium of digital technology only accelerates trends being put forth since the very organization of our society, we can use critical theory and philosophy to tackle the problems of the virtual microcosm, and so on.

The methods are already tested, social change had, has, is and will continue to happen powered by radical ideas and theories. We once had worldwide slavery, and it took a whole movement of human rights to undermine it. And human rights did not simply fell out of the sky, they are based in the ideas of the French revolution and the enlightenment. Social theories for change and even naive utopianism (I must admit) have always been the grounds for changing the big picture of society. Today we face problems related to digital technology, I claim we must look back at philosophers, theorists, advocates for social change and academics for answers, for the problem with digital has more to do with its *steroid-inducing* nature; technology has not created this problems, but rather it creates new ways to accelerate the problems and inequalities previously present and sometimes even invisible - the expansion and growth provided by digital have only now brought these problems into popular discourse. A melting point for radical theories and ideas of the past must be created and spoke in twenty century technological lingo. A new framework for embracing theory, philosophy and ethics in technology were we speak not of *Kant said this but Nietzsche said that* manner, but a framework that philosophers, technologists and lawmakers can all understand. This is the notion behind *digital rights*, we are not to fall for the trap of consumer reform, but instead use the rhetoric of human rights, but applied to the new digital frontier. Digital rights are meant to invoke parallels to human rights, because digital rights is the acknowledgment that we face a human problem rather than a consumer problem. For technologists and reformers to hug human rights and use them as a means for social ends is the goal of digital rights. Human rights have the built-in advantage of imagery, since they are born out of enlightenment values they usually cast philosophy and theory as part of the question and answer to human suffering and injustice. The added advantage of adopting human rights into the digital landscape is that human rights is already a popular, well known and understood idea. Early humanists thinkers have already condensed their ideals into pop culture, everybody wants, cares for and benefits from basic human decency; human rights convey this philosophical goal in simple terms we already claim to advocate for.

Now the reason to adopt human rights into digital is not merely a matter of its simplicity or because is the laziest way out, no. Digital rights ought to be broadly understood as striving for human rights on the internet and digital technologies in general, but this newly repackaged theory must also condense, include and embrace nuanced and complex political and social goals under the flag of human rights. We have lots of work to do, we must invite and platform theories of social change from every direction and perspective. Digital rights are also meant as a way to create and empower allies. The elaborate way to summon this shared fight is *intersectionality*, a movement and framework born out of feminist theory, in it people oppressed by different means (gender discrimination, sexual orientation, religious beliefs, economic position, etc.) must not fight one another, but join in their shared fight against oppression. In the same way, we must not cast out people from an online moment for not being "*the correct type of oppressed.*" In other words, alternative social media programmers and advocates, cryptocurrency users, copyright reformists, free culture proponents, right to repair legislators, online privacy defenders, internet addiction and digital harm psychologists, anti-corporate silicon valley critical people, public domain scientists and publishers, open source coders, and yes even feminists and gamers are all facing the same kind of struggle in the cybernetic world. Human rights, and by extent digital rights claim our differences in tactics and strategies are less important than our shared humanity. We all deserve decency and respect, we demand this in the world of electoral politics with our votes, but then why do we give private companies the right and legality to do as they please with our digital selves? If we expect basic human rights in real life, we should demand the same in online spaces. Because it's proven to work to liberate us, because its fair, and most importantly because its plainly the right thing to do unto others. We must defend our humanity in this foreign virtual territory, we may not have the local advantage, but we have each other and our shared humanity. We have ourselves, and only ourselves to cure our digital pathology.