# Digital Rights

With the turn of the millennium a new world of possibilities opened up thanks to digital technology. Little did we know, but the days of the analog were counted, soon enough a new space for creativity and flourishment would cast itself into all areas of our lives. This unlocked creativity came in many forms, but little to no concern - or not enough concern - was taken to the level of creativity we discovered in ourselves. These tools eliminated so much of the friction of our mind that, even in the early days of tech, we begun creatively destroying some of the grounds of our culture. Today's entrepreneurs live by a kind of disruption motto, this is not a coincidence. For the blessings of digital are so overpowering, as to show it's bias. Similar to people, who have "traps of the mind" or illusions in the form of cognitive bias; we tend to perceive patterns where there are none, etc; digital technology has its own biases, that on their own are not worth loosing sleep to, but when our society is shaped, modeled, educated, and expressed by digital means - then the bias of *ones and zeros* ripples into every aspect of culture.

Digital spaces have an interesting effects on who inhabit them, we can create and manage multiple identities, get lost in the crowd, we entertain ideas for the sake of it, we jaywalk between domains and websites as if it was nothing. We are so accustomed to our cybernetic homes that we created new rules, different rules, about how to interact with people and with software. For example, in online spaces we understand the law to be meaningless when it comes to copyright. The legal framework for dealing with intellectual property makes sense with a brick and mortar business, a physical work of art, or a plastic product. But the biases of digital technology are so unorthodox to material logic that this notion of intellectual property and copyright just does not make any sense online. The raw materials of an intellectual work online are *copy-paste-able*, so we copy away; and we build a different kind of culture around this disregard of the law.

We have changed, and we have lots to thank to our digital selves. But we must remain aware that the ripple of digital disruption is not a thing of the past. The waves of the ocean are roaring with change, and to move forward into the digital age we must embrace the fact that the old paradigm is fading. Now a novel idea enters the room, an idea I will argue is ultimately naive. *The new age is here, so we might as well dive into the sea*, an inclination towards digital-absolutism creeps behind the corner and begin staring us all in the eye. To embrace change should not mean to flip the whole playing board and throw the dice and instructions on the floor. We should not forget why we like digital technology in the first pace, only by understanding what do we want our of tech we can amplify its strengths and filter its weaknesses; what we defiantly don't want is a romantic-obsessive love for digital for the sake of digital. In this book I try to get to know it better, find out what it likes and if we could make a good team or panther.

Look, I admit it, digital might not be perfect, but pretending it is will cost us a tremendous amount of wasted effort. I might not come off as your regular technology lecturer or thinker, through this book you will come to understand my great cynicism for tech. Today's fixation on digital is, in my view, ultimately harmful. However, I am not a pessimist. I have great hopes for technology and a sane digital future, but to understand the true potential of this tool, we must also understand were and how it can go wrong.

Something must be perfectly clear from now on: This topic can become unconformable.  