# Minimizing a window

What is software? Well software is many things, software can definitely take the shape of art. But is it intrinsically art? And the battle begins - now, I claim not to swim on said waters. My point regarding tech and art is not a binary one. It's not a matter of elevating all code into high art or poking software so that the balloon pops and code becomes incapable of being more than text on a screen. To me, the conversation of categorizing tech as art misses the point by a centimeter. The discourse around tech, art and their intrinsic relationship resemble other modes of conversation, said mode is usually tucked away by merely mentioning it's name. Thus I will try a bubble wrapped approach to the issue of categorizing code.

If we speak in terms of definitions, software is synonymous with a computer program. A set of instructions written with an explicit goal being played out by a computer. Many arguments can arise from this basic definition, some people focus on code being *written*; a product of a creative process and thus artistic in nature; some people might extrapolate from *a set of instructions*, in this sense software is on it's most basic level engaging in control of outcomes; thus inherently authoritative or manipulative. The interpretations of this definition are never ending by nature, but by simply engaging in this type of discourse we are entering a very specific mode of conversation. If the digital realm, or virtual society, were a computer, then to argue that software is inherently something specific, like art, or that it will lead to a catastrophic end and there's nothing we can do about it is like running a program. This programs have very specific instructions, their code dictate the kinds of questions we can ask, the frame of mind we must enact to use the GUI, and the rules of the game. This program might be up front and center, red bold letters blinking: *Privacy!* or *Security!* This window might occupy so much screen real estate we might not see what programs run beneath. The first step to analyses cyberspace is to put away the buzzwords and superficial talking points by minimizing all windows. If we were to ask what is a computer we might come to diffident answers by simply displaying different programs or windows in fullscreen: If a word processor occupies the screen we might think computers are only for work, if a game were displaying we might conclude that computers are entrainment (depending on the genre of game we might extrapolate that computers are for kids or nerds or soccer fans), now if we place a web browser as the window on focus we might get one of the most popular conclusions of the question *what is a computer?* If a browser takes full focus then a computer is the internet & portable computers, such as smartphones, are social media sites like Facebook and WhatsApp. Computer enthusiasts know that these devices are more than just social media, some of the savviest among us may even be elitist in this position: *They* only know Facebook, while *us*, well we know what we're doing. Now, if to confuse a computer with social media and the internet is such a beginners mistake, then to understand the nature of code we must take a neutral view of the subject. Meaning, we must minimize all windows, look at the desktop and only when we look at the device in it's purest form we can begin to extrapolate the meaning of a computer. Now we set aside if software is *this or that* since we're not looking at a GUI window, but looking directly at a computer. What do you see?

We arrive at the desktop, there's a bar containing programs and a file search, must we stop now? If we end our exploitative journey here, then a computer is what we have come to understand as the *personal computer*: A box with a screen that has a picture and some icons what when pointed with a mouse display a windows into another program. But this desktop, this graphical interface, this dynamic of clicking and opening are programs in themselves. If we remove the layers of abstraction a computer is bound to an operating system: A highly specific program that opens and controls the rules regarding what other sub-programs can do, how they can be opened or accessed, should they be read or write files, etc.

To understand how this relates to software as a whole we must then ask the specific about the current operating system at hand. *What is the operating system of technology?* The nature of software, and tech as a hole lays in this question. Just like all computer programs follow the logic of the OS, all technology follow the logic of something external. This missing link is the kernel of tech, it dictates what kinds of software are desirable, possible, runnable, how much resources they allocate, and so on. Again, I must empathize that we must not get lost in the weeds of *crypto-currencies, privacy, security, fake news, or the attention economy*, this are fine topics on their own, we will tackle them at some point, but remember that those are programs we must minimize to understand the nature of the operating system underneath.

There is something about this operating system that has remained invisible. By definition operating systems are supposed to live on different grounds, away from the end user. 