# (re)creative

The digitized world has brought us to a state of almost daily creative disruption. When concepts assumed to be facts of nature come into question at any turn of the race, it is necessary for one concept to remain undoubtable: *The dynamics of creation and interpretation*. It's these concepts that allow for the king to be dethroned on a daily basis in today's digital economy. Hence for the digital world to change in economic, social, moral and technical terms the paradigm of creativity itself must change beforehand. To redo our creative understanding means not to disregard today's layman understanding of creativity, nor the cancellation of creative works prior to our new framework for creation; but to paint a holistic picture.

In pop-culture creativity is key, as it's indistinguishable from value or worth. The heroes of the early digital revolution are figures to be, well, seen as heroic due to their creative destruction of the analog mindset. Idols such as Bill Gates and Steve Jobs are interpreted not as aggressive and market-hungry businessman but as your average garage hacker, they are just everyday working class people like you and me - despite Bill being born a millionaire and Steve using the labor of actual working class garage hackers to develop products with his name written on the silicon coating.

Loyal super-fans of brands such as Apple, Microsoft, Google or Sony usually argue amongst themselves in therms related to creativity: The gaming console warriors say that Sony copied Microsoft's creation because microsoft's game consoles' name, The X-box 360, reassembles the button pattern of Sony's controller, said controller has 4 buttons, 3 amongst them are the cross button (or X), the triangle button (or box) and a circle button (with 360 degrees). This button arrangement highlights something crucial to creativity, that design is indirectly or directly inspired by or affected by the surrounding design and artistic landscape. It's easy to write off the "*Sony controller buttons Microsoft console name*" as a bad proof of originality, or a simple coincidence, but a narrow truth is barely showing through. In practical terms there's only a limited amount of ways to design a controller meant to be globally understood and limited ways to name a box-shaped gaming product targeted at teenagers thirsty for the extreme. Yes, a controller could in theory be designed with dozens of buttons labeled in a made up iconography, or a console could be named on a made up alphabet and phonetic system, but that's just not practical. These designs are not only a product of the material conditions of the world and the current ideas and social norms, but a factor to produce new designs. In other words: Designs are a read-write medium.

Meaning you can always, no matter how ridiculous or far fetched it may seem, follow the influence. The current video game controller can be traced from today's thumb stick driven joypad back to the Nintendo Entrainment System's 4 way directional arrows, then towards Atari's joystick with 8 directions, down to the first game console (the Magnavox Odyssey) knob based controller. Now that we arrived at knob level, it can be tempting to stop, but a truly read-write medium must show connection outside it's field. Since its design is deeply intertwined with material and social reality, it must also overlap with other aspects of material reality or social norms. A materialist analysis of the game controller can go from the early knob based input down to the fundamentals of a knob: the wheal, the human hand and the predominant circular shapes and patterns in nature; we arrive at an understanding of the game controller in terms of  the history of tools, ergonomics and a scientific understanding of the natural world; hence we arrive at a material understanding of the game controller. Meaning what physical and real world characteristics and phenomenons have lead designers to shape our input devices like they did. A door is bounded to the fundamental shape of people, it's a visible limitation of design. Likewise other configurations of inventions and objects put together are decisions rooted in physical reality, hence material reality. But a material understanding of architecture, art and design are only a portion of the whole. Just like objects and materials dictate the conditions for the production of other objects, social trends also influence the modes of production and the desirability of their outcomes. Early video game history developed alongside the television industry, the essence of TV affected the design of the game console. This essence is built by both material circumstances and social construction. At some point, game makers and controller manufacturers tried to leave behind the game-pad in favor of a TV remote shaped controller. This happened not because the Atari joystick leads to a TV control remote then back to the Nintendo 64 joystick, their designs are not linked by conditions but by human expectation and familiarity, the TV control-shaped console game controller was not part of the evolutionary steps but a fork on the road driven by a social fad. People were already familiar with the TV controller, it was immensely popular, why not use the design elsewhere?

These two basic factors can be generally applied to understand design: Material conditions; meaning what resources were available, what other systems or natural phenomenon ware previously present, and what kinds of physical configurations predate the design; and cultural norms; what's expected from the design, what are acceptable or taboo designs, and what trends or moments play out around the direct sphere of influence about said design. These factors are all about surroundings: What is happening in the world and society is what ultimately shapes, limits, and influences design. The Merriam Webster dictionary defines design as  follows: *"to create, fashion, execute, or construct according to plan"*. If creative intent and planning are crucial for design we can begin to broaden our theory of design into the general field of creativity. To create in this context means to apply work into an object or idea in order to manipulate it's characteristics, said process of re-shaping, re-purposing, or re-interpreting are bounded to the limits of design, meaning the creative process is also influenced by the social and material reality of the surrounding place or society. An invention, no matter how original or *never-seen-before* it seems is always product of a creative process of material and social influence.

An inventor or creator can't come up with an idea in a vacuum, the society and physical world always trails behind, sculpting the mind of the creator and the invention itself. The material and social world are also read-write mediums, since they form part of the read-write creative ecosystem. Social norms, can, will, and do change all the time in parallel with the real and material world. People change the world and the word changes people - All at once. The object-subject relationship between inventors and inventions breaks down at this point. The inventor is the product of the world, while the world being the product of the inventor, the invention itself forms part of the word and the inventor's mind, feeding into itself and spilling to the surroundings that will inevitably spit back. The creative ecosystem is a melting pot of the material and the social and both the social and material world are abstractions of the same concept. If a movie credits all actors, assistants, animators, producers, set designers and so on; it is only fair to attribute a creative work to the material set design, social norms written in the screenplay and all foundational work prior. The failure to attribute the collective effort of society and reality is to fundamentally misunderstand creativity and it's process.

This melting pot is a new whole, a substance that mixes itself constantly. It's this mix and re-mix loop that drives creativity, and with fancy digital gadgets and toys creates today's creative disruption. Products, ideas and works of art are not a whole object, but a mix of social and material circumstances - This are the reasons why, in popular music terms, everything is a remix.